Configure ConvexProviderWithClerk
Both Clerk and Convex have provider components that are required to provide authentication and client context.

Typically, you'd replace <ConvexProvider> with <ConvexProviderWithClerk>, but with Next.js App Router, things are a bit more complex.

<ConvexProviderWithClerk> calls ConvexReactClient() to get Convex's client, so it must be used in a Client Component. Your app/layout.tsx, where you would use <ConvexProviderWithClerk>, is a Server Component, and a Server Component cannot contain Client Component code. To solve this, you must first create a wrapper Client Component around <ConvexProviderWithClerk>:
'use client'

import { ReactNode } from 'react'
import { ConvexReactClient } from 'convex/react'
import { ConvexProviderWithClerk } from 'convex/react-clerk'
import { useAuth } from '@clerk/nextjs'

if (!process.env.NEXT_PUBLIC_CONVEX_URL) {
  throw new Error('Missing NEXT_PUBLIC_CONVEX_URL in your .env file')
}

const convex = new ConvexReactClient(process.env.NEXT_PUBLIC_CONVEX_URL)

export default function ConvexClientProvider({ children }: { children: ReactNode }) {
  return (
    <ConvexProviderWithClerk client={convex} useAuth={useAuth}>
      {children}
    </ConvexProviderWithClerk>
  )
}



Wrap your app in Clerk and Convex
Now, your Server Component, app/layout.tsx, can render <ConvexClientProvider> instead of rendering <ConvexProviderWithClerk> directly. It's important that <ClerkProvider> wraps <ConvexClientProvider>, and not the other way around, as Convex needs to be able to access the Clerk context:
import type { Metadata } from 'next'
import { Geist, Geist_Mono } from 'next/font/google'
import './globals.css'
import { ClerkProvider } from '@clerk/nextjs'
import ConvexClientProvider from '@/components/ConvexClientProvider'

const geistSans = Geist({
  variable: '--font-geist-sans',
  subsets: ['latin'],
})

const geistMono = Geist_Mono({
  variable: '--font-geist-mono',
  subsets: ['latin'],
})

export const metadata: Metadata = {
  title: 'Clerk Next.js Quickstart',
  description: 'Generated by create next app',
}

export default function RootLayout({
  children,
}: Readonly<{
  children: React.ReactNode
}>) {
  return (
    <html lang="en">
      <body className={`${geistSans.variable} ${geistMono.variable} antialiased`}>
        <ClerkProvider>
          <ConvexClientProvider>{children}</ConvexClientProvider>
        </ClerkProvider>
      </body>
    </html>
  )
}



Show UI based on authentication state
You can control which UI is shown when the user is signed in or signed out using Convex's <Authenticated>, <Unauthenticated> and <AuthLoading> helper components. These should be used instead of Clerk's <SignedIn>, <SignedOut> and <ClerkLoading> components, respectively.

It's important to use the useConvexAuth() hook instead of Clerk's useAuth() hook when you need to check whether the user is logged in or not. The useConvexAuth() hook makes sure that the browser has fetched the auth token needed to make authenticated requests to your Convex backend, and that the Convex backend has validated it.

In the following example, the <Content /> component is a child of <Authenticated>, so its content and any of its child components are guaranteed to have an authenticated user, and Convex queries can require authentication:
"use client";

import { Authenticated, Unauthenticated } from "convex/react";
import { SignInButton, UserButton } from "@clerk/nextjs";
import { useQuery } from "convex/react";
import { api } from "../convex/_generated/api";

export default function Home() {
  return (
    <>
      <Authenticated>
        <UserButton />
        <Content />
      </Authenticated>
      <Unauthenticated>
        <SignInButton />
      </Unauthenticated>
    </>
  );
}

function Content() {
  const messages = useQuery(api.messages.getForCurrentUser);
  return <div>Authenticated content: {messages?.length}</div>;
}



Use authentication state in your Convex functions
If the client is authenticated, you can access the information stored in the JWT via ctx.auth.getUserIdentity.

If the client isn't authenticated, ctx.auth.getUserIdentity will return null.

Make sure that the component calling this query is a child of <Authenticated> from convex/react. Otherwise, it will throw on page load:
import { query } from "./_generated/server";

export const getForCurrentUser = query({
  args: {},
  handler: async (ctx) => {
    const identity = await ctx.auth.getUserIdentity();
    if (identity === null) {
      throw new Error("Not authenticated");
    }
    return await ctx.db
      .query("messages")
      .withIndex("by_author", (q) => q.eq("author", identity.email))
      .collect();
  },
});